[CONTENT] Blog: GUI setup, Part 3 (#125)
reactos/web-content: content/blogs/gui-setup-part3-first-testing-problems.md

---

> title:      "1st-stage GUI setup - December 2023: First tests"

Reviewer: It would be nice to have (Part 1, 2, 3, etc.) in the article title.

Author: Done here, and also for part 2 (PR #124) . I will apply this to the blog 1 too later.

author:     "hbelusca"
date:       2024-01-24
tags:       [ newsletter, gui-setup ]
---

Greetings!

In this third blog post, I will cover my [work done during the month of December 2023](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kx80SmSkj1IdomVC9gcbA_MJ7XFiz_YlYYVxoxv-Jgs/view#gid=946565330):
testing the whole 1st-stage GUI setup, together with the [partially wine-synced setupapi dll](/blogs/gui-setup-part1-setupapi).

## Finishing and testing the partitioning page UI

The first week was devoted to finishing putting together the code for manipulating partitions from the user interface, [using the new workflow](/blogs/gui-setup-part2-partitioning#workflow-change-in-the-gui-mode-setup), and testing it.

> At the UI level, this means, verifying that inserting and deleting partitions correctly inserts or deletes their entries from the list; that two consecutive empty space entries get merged together; and that supplemental partition creation properties (like the selected formatting options) stay associated to the correct partition (and don't get freed, until the correct partition entry is deleted).

Author: nice idea, will do

For a description of partition operations, please refer to my [previous blog post](/blogs/gui-setup-part2-partitioning#workflow-change-in-the-gui-mode-setup).

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_config_pages.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_config_pages.png" caption="Overview of the ReactOS GUI setup configuration pages (from top-left to right-bottom: Welcome, Type of Install, Basic hardware selection, Partition list)">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

Under `Advanced Options...`, the user can choose the directory name where ReactOS will be installed (default: `\ReactOS`), and where to install the ReactOS bootloader.
For MBR disks, the default choice is to install the bootloader on both
the [VBR (Volume Boot Record)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volume_boot_record) of the system ("active") partition where the FreeLoader `freeldr.sys` file is copied,
and the [MBR (Master Boot Record)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Master_boot_record) of the disk where this partition belongs to.

> GPT support is presently absent, but will be added in the future. This is the reason why in the new options dialog, a dynamical combo-box list has been prefered over the old radio-button selection, for allowing the addition or removal of platform-dependent choices.

Author: I've slightly reformulated the 2nd sentence there.

1029     /* Get a temp file name */
1030     if (!GetTempPathW(ARRAYSIZE(TempPath), TempPath))
1031     {
1032         ERR("GetTempPathW error\n");
1033         return FALSE;
1034     }
1035
1036     /* Try to open the source file */
1037     hSource = LZOpenFileW((LPWSTR)source, &OfStruct, OF_READ);
1038     if (hSource < 0)
1039     {
1040         TRACE("LZOpenFileW(1) error %d %s\n", (int)hSource, debugstr_w(source));
1041         return FALSE;
1042     }
1043
1044     if (!GetTempFileNameW(TempPath, L"", 0, TempFile))
1045     {
...
...
1056         return FALSE;
1057     }
1058
1059     /* Extract the compressed file to a temp location */
1060     hTemp = LZOpenFileW(TempFile, &OfStruct, OF_CREATE);
1061     if (hTemp < 0)
1062     {
...
...
1076         return FALSE;
1077     }
1078
1079     lRes = LZCopy(hSource, hTemp);
1080
```

(_Important NOTE:_ This is ReactOS-specific code to support a behaviour similar to what Windows has, and which is _**NOT**_ currently supported on Wine.
_However_, Wine code also uses a temporary destination file to perform the copy, instead of directly copying over any possible existing file. See below for the reason why.)

> The default `TEMP` directory for the currently-running ReactOS installation is retrieved by a call to `GetTempPathW()` -- then followed by an attempt to open the source with `LZOpenFileW()` that also serves to handle single-compressed source files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default `TEMP` directory for the currently-running ReactOS installation is retrieved by a call to `GetTempPathW()` -- then followed by an attempt to open the source file with `LZOpenFileW()` that also serves to handle single-compressed source files.
```

> (Remember those `MSPAINT.EX_`-like files in your Windows &le; 2003 installation disks? Those are compressed single-file CAB archives, containing one single file, in this example: `MSPAINT.EXE`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Remember those `MSPAINT.EX_`-like files on your Windows &le; 2003 installation disks? Those are compressed single-file CAB archives, containing just one file, in this example: `MSPAINT.EXE`.)
```

Author: > [...] files on your Windows &le; 2003 installation disks?

Technically the files are inside the disk(s) ^^

This call will succeed even if the file is _not_ compressed.

Then, a temporary destination file path is generated with `GetTempFileNameW()`, based on the retrieved `TEMP` directory path.

> Finally the source file is extracted to this temporary file (or just copied to, in case it was not compressed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the source file is extracted to this temporary path (or just copied to, if it was not compressed).
```

Only then (omitted code that follows the snippet above), the created temporary file is moved to its final target.

> (The reason why this temporary file step is necessary, is for handling copy/replacements over files that could be already existing and currently in use.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This temporary file step is necessary for handling copy/replace operations on already existing files that are currently in use.
```

Author: I have added to this sentence: `"..., for which the [operation is delayed until reboot"`

> The question is then: _**Where is the default**_ `TEMP` directory, when running the ReactOS setup via the ReactOS LiveCD?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This raises the question: _**Where is the default**_ `TEMP` directory, when running ReactOS setup via the LiveCD?
```

The answer is: _**Located** in the currently-running ReactOS instance, that is, **in the read-only LiveCD ISO itself!!**_ (in `X:\reactos\TEMP`).
Obviously, attempting to create/write a file to this destination will inevitably fail.
(Even though the ultimate destination of the extracted & copied file will be on the write-accessible ReactOS partition on the hard-disk.)

Because of this failure, attempting to install such files will fail.

> This failure, coupled to the fact that the [custom setupapi file-copy queue callback function](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/setupapi/creating-a-custom-queue-callback-routine) I wrote in the GUI installer, did not correctly handle for file-copy failures (and instead was just requesting setupapi to re-attempt copying the same file), led to an infinite loop and thus an apparent hanging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This failure, coupled with the fact that the [custom setupapi file-copy queue callback function](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/setupapi/creating-a-custom-queue-callback-routine) I wrote in the GUI installer, did not correctly handle file-copy failures (and instead were just requesting setupapi to re-attempt copying the same file), led to an infinite loop and thus an apparent hang.
```

#### The fix

> Fixing this bug is actually pretty simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fixing this bug was actually pretty simple.
```

First, the [custom setupapi file-copy queue callback function](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/setupapi/nc-setupapi-psp_file_callback_w) in the GUI installer needs to recognize it is called due to a copy error
(with the [`SPFILENOTIFY_COPYERROR`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/setupapi/spfilenotify-copyerror) setupapi [notification](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/setupapi/notifications))
and return `FILEOP_SKIP` or any other "error" value, instead of the default `FILEOP_DOIT` or `FILEOP_RETRY`.

> This would make the code more "future-proof" for any other sort of copy errors. (An improvement would also to show a custom error message box.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would make the code more "future-proof" for any other sort of copy errors. (An improvement would be also to show a custom error message box.)
```
(also, one sentence per line - the one in braces)

Then, in the `do_file_copyW()` function, instead of calling `GetTempPathW()` to get the temporary directory, just generate a temporary file path and name based on the target path, where the file will actually be installed.

> Since this path is guaranteed to exist on the system -- it is inside the write-accessible ReactOS installation partition and the (sub-)directory has been created by a previous step -- , a temporary file can be created there without problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this path is guaranteed to exist on the system -- it is inside the write-accessible ReactOS installation partition and the (sub-)directory that has been created by a previous step, a temporary file will be created there without problems.
```

### 2nd main "bug"

> Now that the 1st bug has been fixed, retesting the GUI installer goes without apparent problems, until one notices the extreme slowness when copying files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the 1st bug has been fixed, retesting the GUI installer goes without apparent problems, until one notices the extreme slowdown when copying files.
```

Clearly this does not happen when using the text-mode USETUP.
What is going on here?

{{< video src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_filecopy_slow.mp4" type="video/mp4" caption="File copy deadly slow">}}

The GUI setup has been made to use the Wine-synced setupapi routines for extracting the files from the `reactos.cab` source.

The gist of how the file copy loop works is as follows:

1. Get the next file source/target paths from the queue;
2. Call `do_file_copyW()` for the file: if it exists in the source installation directory, copy it and Goto Step 1.
3. If not, check installation CAB file (`reactos.cab` in our case) with `extract_cabinet_file()`.
If failed, throw error via the file-copy callback.
4. Open CAB file, loop through it to find the file, extract it, and close the CAB file.
5. Goto Step 1 for next file.

> In Steps 3. and 4., the helper function `extract_cabinet_file()` is used, and ultimately calls into the `cabinet.dll!FDICopy()` function (`cabinet.dll` is also a Wine-synced dll).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Steps 3 and 4, the helper function `extract_cabinet_file()` is used, and ultimately calls into the `cabinet.dll!FDICopy()` function (`cabinet.dll` is also a Wine-synced dll).
```
(I think it will be more readable this way)

These two steps are the bottleneck of this whole file-copy loop:
because, for each file to copy, potentially present in the _same_ CAB archive, the archive is opened, the file has to be found (by looping through them to find the correct one) and extracted, then the CAB archive is closed.
And this operation is done over and over again.

In comparison, it is _much faster_ to open the CAB archive _only once_, then whenever a file needs to be copied, check whether it exists in the CAB archive, starting from the current search position, and if possible, exploit the fact that the files in the copy queue are sorted in order of their appearance in the CAB archive.
(Alternatively, loop once through all the files in the CAB archive and check whether each successive of these are files that need to be extracted.)
The exception could be, that if the next file is not in the order, one restarts finding from the beginning of the CAB archive.
This would be the slow code path, but not actually taken in real life due to the reasons from above.

This is exactly what the text-mode USETUP installer does, and why ReactOS installation time is there blazing fast in comparison.

> Additionally, it appears, after some further investigation (suggested by Mark Jansen), that each read operation from the CAB file, implemented with a `fdi->read()` callback (registered when initializing the fdi context with the `FDICreate()` function, done by setupapi), that does a `ReadFile()` call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, it appears, after some further investigation suggested by Mark Jansen, that each read operation from the CAB file, implemented with a `fdi->read()` callback (registered when initializing the fdi context with the `FDICreate()` function, done by setupapi), does a `ReadFile()` call.
```

Meaning, basically, that each data read from the CAB triggers a file I/O operation to disk, making the whole operation slower than it could be.
This could be alleviated by adding ReactOS-specific code in setupapi, to memory-map the CAB archive instead so that reading from it can be done directly via memory reads.

> Such a thing is also done by the text-mode USETUP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such trick is also used by the text-mode USETUP.
```

#### The current workaround

> To alleviate the problems described above, the simplest workaround is to just use USETUP's file-copy and extraction functions. With minimal adaptations the existing code can be easily adapted for usage in the GUI installer. File copy works and finishes speedily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To alleviate the problems described above, the simplest workaround is to just use USETUP's file-copy and extraction functions. With minimal adaptations the existing code can be easily reused for usage in the GUI installer. File copy works and finishes quickly.
```
(also there are several sentences, please one per line)

Author: "reused for usage" --> "reused"

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_filecopy_finish.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_filecopy_finish.png" caption="Last file being copied. The directory listing shows that the files are there.">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

### 3rd bug

> At the end of the installation, the ReactOS GUI installer creates the necessary registry hives (SYSTEM, SOFTWARE, SAM and SECURITY) in their correct place in the installation directory (`%SystemRoot%\system32\config`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of the installation, the ReactOS GUI installer creates the necessary registry hives (SYSTEM, SOFTWARE, SAM and SECURITY) in their respective places inside the installation directory (`%SystemRoot%\system32\config`).
```

Using NT APIs, they are created, filled for one part with default settings and for another part with installation-specific settings, then flushed back to disk.

> Notice that these created registry hives are separate from the system root ones being used by the LiveCD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the created registry hives are separate from those being used by the LiveCD system itself.
```

Author: "LiveCD system itself" , or "LiveCD itself" ?

Reviewer: I think "LiveCD itself" would be fine too.

Author: ok this is what I have implemented.

> In the LiveCD (running in the so-called "WinPE" or "MiniNT" mode), the system root hives are mounted with shared (read-only) access, because they reside on a read-only medium usually, or in network boot they are on an (external) shared network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the LiveCD (running in the so-called "WinPE" or "MiniNT" mode), the system root hives are mounted with shared (read-only) access, because they usually reside on a read-only medium, or in network boot they are on an (external) network share.
```

Thus for these LiveCD hives, any writes made to them (and any flush to disk) is a no-operation.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_create_registry.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_create_registry.png" caption="Creating the registry hives">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

> Other hives (those that can be loaded manually) can be loaded with full access because they can reside elsewhere than on a read-only medium (and can be on the local computer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other hives (those that could be loaded manually) can be loaded with full access because they may reside elsewhere than on a read-only medium (and can be on the local computer).
```

The bug was that _all_ registry hives, including any that could be created and mounted long after the LiveCD system hives, were mounted by the kernel in read-only mode.
And thus, any changes made to them during installation were not saved and were lost after reboot.

> (More precisely, the `CmpShareSystemHives` flag to signal that root system hives have to be loaded with shared access, was not reset for loading other hives with full access.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(More precisely, the `CmpShareSystemHives` flag, signalling that root system hives have to be loaded with shared access, was not reset for loading other hives with full access.)
```

This has been recently fixed in the `master` branch in commit [feb67576d](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commit/feb67576ddf09b847c6ecf7b8fd9675ccf74e11c).

## What's next?

With the presently-discussed three bugs now fixed, the ReactOS GUI setup is just barely working.
There are however many aspects that still require polishing and minor bugs that need a fix:
- Fixing the wizard pages transitions for the "Update/Repair ReactOS" scenario -- not discussed in this present blog.
- Removing several hacks added in the partition UI page code.
- Fixing the bug where, in the present code, the GUI setup would install ReactOS and always set its default language to the very first one (index 0) in the language list... which is Albanian!
- Improve the bootloader installation functions, shared with the text-mode USETUP.

> In the next [blog post](/blogs/gui-setup-part4-future-improvements), I will dicuss about these improvements as well as some future possible ones for the ReactOS GUI installer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next [blog post](/blogs/gui-setup-part4-future-improvements), I will dicuss these improvements as well as some future possible ones for the ReactOS GUI installer.
```

Stay tuned!

----

#### Some credits!

> Here are the credits, in order of appearance, of what I used for making the guisetup_filecopy_slow.mp4 video:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the credits, in order of appearance, of what I've used for making the guisetup_filecopy_slow.mp4 video:
```

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/hybridcd_lang_select.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/hybridcd_lang_select.png" caption="General language and keyboard layout selection">}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/hybridcd_run_install_select.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/hybridcd_run_install_select.png" caption="Want to run the LiveCD environment, or start the GUI setup?">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

Note that the latter can also be started from the LiveCD desktop.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/hybridcd_guisetup_from_desktop.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/hybridcd_guisetup_from_desktop.png" caption="The GUI setup can also be run from the LiveCD desktop">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

The language-selection dialog, shown above, currently also affects the language and keyboard layout that will be used for the new ReactOS installation (_NOTE: This is subject to change in the future._)
Installation then starts with the usual welcome screen, followed by the choice of supported hardware presets (computer, display and keyboard types).
Then, follows the list of disks and their partitions detected on the system.

> Currently, partitions can be only created on already-initialized MBR disks -- support for GPT disks and not-yet-initialized disks is planned to be added in the future.

Author: "are planned" --> here I meant the support (in singular), so I think, "is planned" would be more correct?

> Currently, partitions can be only created on already-initialized MBR disks -- support for GPT disks and not-yet-initialized disks is planned to be added in the future.

Reviewer 2: > Additional support for GPT disks and uninitialized disks is planned in the future.

Planned *for* the future would sound better, but otherwise sounds good to me :) I was thinking of support for GPT disks and support for uninitialized disks as separate features.

> Currently, partitions can be only created on already-initialized MBR disks -- support for GPT disks and not-yet-initialized disks is planned to be added in the future.

Author: Works for me :+1:

1061     if (hTemp < 0)
1062     {
...
...
1076         return FALSE;
1077     }
1078
1079     lRes = LZCopy(hSource, hTemp);
1080
```

(_Important NOTE:_ This is ReactOS-specific code to support a behaviour similar to what Windows has, and which is _**NOT**_ currently supported on Wine.
_However_, Wine code also uses a temporary destination file to perform the copy, instead of directly copying over any possible existing file. See below for the reason why.)

The default `TEMP` directory for the currently-running ReactOS installation is retrieved by a call to `GetTempPathW()`, then followed by an attempt to open the source file with `LZOpenFileW()` that also handles single-compressed source files.
(Remember those `MSPAINT.EX_`-like files in your Windows &le; 2003 installation disks? Those are compressed single-file CAB archives, containing just one file, in this example: `MSPAINT.EXE`.)
This call will succeed even if the file is _not_ compressed.

Then, a temporary destination file path is generated with `GetTempFileNameW()`, based on the retrieved `TEMP` directory path.
Finally, the source file is extracted to this temporary path (or just copied to, if it was not compressed).

> Only then (omitted code that follows the snippet above), the created temporary file is moved to its final target.

Author: thanks, this makes the text slightly more readable than what it already is ^^

Meaning, basically, that each data read from the CAB triggers a file I/O operation to disk, making the whole operation slower than it could be.
This could be alleviated by adding ReactOS-specific code in setupapi, to memory-map the CAB archive instead so that reading from it can be done directly via memory reads.
Such a trick is also used by the text-mode USETUP.

#### The current workaround

To alleviate the problems described above, the simplest workaround is to just use USETUP's file-copy and extraction functions.
With minimal adaptations the existing code can be easily reused in the GUI installer.
File copy works and finishes quickly.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_filecopy_finish.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_filecopy_finish.png" caption="Last file being copied. The directory listing shows that the files are there.">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

### 3rd bug

At the end of the installation, the ReactOS GUI installer creates the necessary registry hives (SYSTEM, SOFTWARE, SAM and SECURITY) in their respective locations inside the installation directory (`%SystemRoot%\system32\config`).

> Using NT APIs, they are created, filled for one part with default settings and for another part with installation-specific settings, then flushed back to disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using NT APIs, the registry is created from default settings and installation-specific settings, then flushed back to disk.
```

Thus for these LiveCD hives, any writes made to them (and any flush to disk) is a no-operation.

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_create_registry.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_create_registry.png" caption="Creating the registry hives">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

The other hives (that could be loaded manually) can be loaded with full access because they may reside elsewhere than on a read-only medium (and can be on the local computer).

The bug was that _all_ registry hives, including any that could be created and mounted long after the LiveCD system hives, were mounted by the kernel in read-only mode.
And thus, any changes made to them during installation were not saved and were lost after reboot.
(More precisely, the `CmpShareSystemHives` flag, signalling that root system hives have to be loaded with shared access, was not reset for loading other hives with full access.)

This has been recently fixed in the `master` branch in commit [feb67576d](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commit/feb67576ddf09b847c6ecf7b8fd9675ccf74e11c).

## What's next?

> With the presently-discussed three bugs now fixed, the ReactOS GUI setup is just barely working.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With these bugs now fixed, the ReactOS GUI setup just barely works.
```

> There are however many aspects that still require polishing and minor bugs that need a fix:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are however many aspects that still require polishing and minor bugs that needs to be fixed:
```

Author: "needs", or "need"? (since there _are many aspects_ ...)

Author: sentence has been adjusted accordingly

> - Fixing the wizard pages transitions for the "Update/Repair ReactOS" scenario -- not discussed in this present blog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fix the wizard pages transitions for the "Update/Repair ReactOS" scenario -- not discussed in this present blog.
```

- Removing several hacks added in the partition UI page code.
- Fixing the bug where, in the present code, the GUI setup would install ReactOS and always set its default language to the very first one (index 0) in the language list... which is Albanian!
- Improve the bootloader installation functions, shared with the text-mode USETUP.

> In the next [blog post](/blogs/gui-setup-part4-future-improvements), I will dicuss these improvements as well as some future possible ones for the ReactOS GUI installer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the next [blog post](/blogs/gui-setup-part4-future-improvements), I will discuss these improvements and more for the ReactOS GUI installer.
```

---
title:      "1st-stage GUI setup, Part 3 - December 2023: First tests"
author:     "hbelusca"
date:       2024-01-31
tags:       [ newsletter, gui-setup ]
---

Greetings!

Welcome to the third blog of the series "1st-stage GUI setup":

> 1. [September 2023: partly Wine-syncing setupapi](/blogs/gui-setup-part1-setupapi)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

1. [September 2023: partly Wine-syncing setupapi](/blogs/gui-setup-part1-setupapi)
```

2. [October-November 2023: Making partitioning UI work](/blogs/gui-setup-part2-partitioning)
3. December 2023: First tests

In this third blog post, I will cover my [work done during the month of December 2023](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Kx80SmSkj1IdomVC9gcbA_MJ7XFiz_YlYYVxoxv-Jgs/view#gid=946565330):
testing the whole 1st-stage GUI setup, together with the [partially wine-synced setupapi dll](/blogs/gui-setup-part1-setupapi).

## Finishing and testing the partitioning page UI

The first week was devoted to finally putting together the code for manipulating partitions from the user interface, [using the new workflow](/blogs/gui-setup-part2-partitioning#workflow-change-in-the-gui-mode-setup), and testing it.
At the UI level, this means:

> - Verifying that inserting and deleting partitions correctly inserts or deletes their entries from the list;

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Verifying that inserting and deleting partitions correctly inserts or deletes their entries from the list;
```

{{< gallery >}}
{{< figure link="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_create_registry.png" src="/img/blogs/hbelusca_gui-setup/guisetup_create_registry.png" caption="Creating the registry hives">}}
{{< /gallery >}}

The other hives (that could be loaded manually) can be loaded with full access because they may reside elsewhere than on a read-only medium (and can be on the local computer).

The bug was that _all_ registry hives, including any that could be created and mounted long after the LiveCD system hives, were mounted by the kernel in read-only mode.
And thus, any changes made to them during installation were not saved and were lost after reboot.
(More precisely, the `CmpShareSystemHives` flag, signalling that root system hives have to be loaded with shared access, was not reset for loading other hives with full access.)

This has been recently fixed in the `master` branch in commit [feb67576d](https://github.com/reactos/reactos/commit/feb67576ddf09b847c6ecf7b8fd9675ccf74e11c).

## What's next?

With these three major bugs now fixed, the ReactOS GUI setup just barely works.
However, other minor bugs still need to be fixed, and many aspects require polishing:

> - Fix the wizard pages transitions for the "Update/Repair ReactOS" scenario -- not discussed in this present blog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Fix the wizard pages transitions for the "Update/Repair ReactOS" scenario -- not discussed in this present blog.
```

- Remove several hacks added in the partition UI page code.
- Fix a bug where the GUI setup would install ReactOS and always set its default language to the very first one (index 0) in the language list... which is Albanian!
- Improve the bootloader installation functions, shared with the text-mode USETUP.

In the next [blog post](/blogs/gui-setup-part4-future-improvements), I will discuss these improvements and more for the ReactOS GUI installer.

Stay tuned!

----

#### Some credits

I thank [@binarymaster](https://github.com/binarymaster) and [@cbialorucki](https://github.com/cbialorucki) for the thorough review of this blog post!

Below are the credits, in order of appearance, of what I have used for making the guisetup_filecopy_slow.mp4 video:

Music:

> - "Elevator Music" (https://youtu.be/jj0ChLVTpaA)
> - Spongebob Time Card voice: "The French Narrator (Tom Kenny) model" (https://fakeyou.com/tts/TM:vjzq7981swey)
> - "Local Forecast - Elevator" by Kevin MacLeod (https://incompetech.com/music/royalty-free/index.html?isrc=USUAN1300012)
> - ROBLOX oof (https://www.myinstants.com/en/instant/roblox-oof/)
> 
> And online tools:
> - SpongeBob Time Cards Generator (https://spongebob.gavinr.com/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- "Elevator Music" (https://youtu.be/jj0ChLVTpaA)
- Spongebob Time Card voice: "The French Narrator (Tom Kenny) model" (https://fakeyou.com/tts/TM:vjzq7981swey)
- "Local Forecast - Elevator" by Kevin MacLeod (https://incompetech.com/music/royalty-free/index.html?isrc=USUAN1300012)
- ROBLOX oof (https://www.myinstants.com/en/instant/roblox-oof/)

And online tools:

- SpongeBob Time Cards Generator (https://spongebob.gavinr.com/)
```
